                                 ON THE

                          IMPROVED BEET ROOT,

                                   OR

                            _MANGEL WURZEL_.




                                 ON THE
                          IMPROVED BEET ROOT,
                                   AS
                              WINTER FOOD
                              FOR CATTLE.


                          _BY PINDER SIMPSON._


                          THE FOURTH EDITION.

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]

                                LONDON:

                   Printed by J. Swan, Fleet Street,

                     AND SOLD BY TAYLOR AND HESSEY,
                         NO. 93, FLEET STREET.
                                 1815.




                                   TO

                          _JOHN HEATON_, ESQ.

                                   OF

                               BEDFORDS,

                        IN THE COUNTY OF ESSEX.

                      AS A TESTIMONY OF GRATITUDE

                                TO HIM,

                  FOR THE LONG AND FAITHFUL FRIENDSHIP

                               WITH WHICH

                     THE AUTHOR HAS BEEN HONOURED,

                                           THIS TRACT IS INSCRIBED,

                                               BY HIS AFFECTIONATE

                                                   AND OBEDIENT SERVANT,

                                                       PINDER SIMPSON.




                             ADVERTISEMENT.


The following observations, experiments, and calculations have been made
upon the crops of Improved Beet Root, grown upon a farm at Bedfords, in
the county of Essex, containing 600 acres, belonging to John Heaton,
Esq. and in his own occupation. The best mode of cultivating this
valuable root, with the greatest prospect of success, is a subject well
worth the attention of farmers in general, and to those in particular
who have _strong soils_ to cultivate, and feel the want of green food
for their cattle and sheep in the winter and spring months of the year.

Since the first edition of this little work was published, the Author
has obtained many new lights upon the subject, which he has either
embodied in the present edition, or published in an Appendix. The
contents show sufficiently to whom his principal obligation is due, and
he is restrained only by motives of delicacy from saying more. The
circulation of the work was intended to have been chiefly confined to a
few of the inland counties, but the encouragement the Author has
received, and which he respectfully acknowledges, has induced him to
publish a fourth edition, for more general circulation.

                                         _Cheese Cross, Romford._
                                                         _Jan. 1, 1815._




                             THE FOLLOWING

                          NOBLEMEN, GENTLEMEN,

                                  AND

                                FARMERS,

                   HAVE ENCOURAGED THIS PUBLICATION.


  The Most Hon. the Marquis of Bath, Longleat, Wilts.

  The Right Hon. Lord William Bentinck, North Lynn, Norfolk.

  The Right Hon. Lord Bradford, Weston Hall, Staffordshire.

  George Bainbridge, Esq. Gobions, Essex.

  Henry Bowman, Esq. Knockin Hall, Shropshire.

  Mr. John Bailey, Chillingham, Northumberland.

  Mr. William Blake, Rilston, Yorkshire.

  The Right Hon. Lord G. H. Cavendish, Holker Hall, Lancashire.

  The Right Hon. R. P. Carew, M.P. Antony, Cornwall.

  Charles Cavendish, Esq. Savile Row, London.

  John Cotes, Esq. M.P. Woodcote, Shropshire.

  The Rev. William Carr, Bolton Abbey, Yorkshire.

  The Rev. Wm. Crofts, North Grimston, Yorkshire.

  John Carr, Esq. Skipton, Yorkshire.

  Charles Cole, Esq. Paston, Northamptonshire.

  James Campbell, Esq. Whitton Dean, Middlesex.

  Charles Campbell, Esq. Edmonton, Middlesex.

  Mr. T. Clarke, Kirkby Hardwick, Nottinghamshire.

  Mr. John Charlton, Bolton, Lancashire.

  His Grace the Duke of Devonshire, Chatsworth, Derbyshire.

  John Denison, Esq. Ossington, Nottinghamshire.

  A. P. Driver, Esq. Kent Road, Surrey.

  Edward Driver, Esq. ditto.

  John Elsee, Esq. Chigwell Row, Essex.

  The Right Hon. Earl Fitzwilliam, Wentworth, Yorkshire.

  Ralph Fletcher, Esq. Hollins, Lancashire.

  The Right Honourable Lord Grantham, Newby Hall, Yorkshire.

  E. S. Godfrey, Esq. Newark, Nottinghamshire.

  The Right Hon. the Earl of Hardwicke, Wimpole, Cambridgeshire.

  Sir Windsor Hunloke, Bart. Wingerworth, Derbys.

  John Heaton, Esq. Bedfords, Essex.

  Charles Heaton, Esq. Burlington Street, London.

  William Hewson, Esq. Havering Grange, Essex.

  C. N. Hastie, Esq. East Grinstead, Sussex.

  Philip Heacock, Esq. Buxton, Derbyshire.

  Samuel Hicks, Esq. Wyddial, Hertfordshire.

  Mr. Richard Hudson, Plaistowe, Essex.

  Charles Jervis, Esq. Hinckley, Leicestershire.

  William Jacobs, Esq. Havering, Essex.

  The Rev. J. Kendal, Barrowby, Lincolnshire.

  Thomas Knowlton, Esq. Edensor, Derbyshire.

  Sir H. T. Liddell, Bart. Ravensworth Castle, Durham.

  William J. Lockett, Esq. Derby.

  The Right Honourable Viscount Milton, Milton, Northamptonshire.

  Sir Thomas Mostyn, Bart. Mostyn, Flintshire,

  A. L. Maynard, Esq. Chesterfield, Derbyshire.

  John Machell, Esq. Low Plains, Cumberland.

  William Morris, Esq. Havering, Essex.

  Mr. William Masterman, Havering, Essex.

  Sir Richard Neave, Bart. Dagnam Park, Essex.

  Dudley North, Esq. M.P. Glenham Hall, Suffolk.

  His Grace the Duke of Portland, Welbeck, Nottinghamshire.

  The Hon. C. A. Pelham, M.P. Appuldurcombe, Isle of Wight.

  J. D. Paul, Esq. Temple Bar, London.

  Thomas Partington, Esq. Offham, Sussex.

  Mr. Peter Potter, Kentish Town, Middlesex.

  Mr. James Pope, Latimer, Buckinghamshire.

  Mr. Thomas Padmore, Lincroft, Staffordshire.

  Mr. Thomas Pinder, Eakring, Nottinghamshire.

  Thomas Roberts, Jun. Esq. Hampstead, Middlesex.

  Edward Russell, Esq. Holland House, Surrey.

  John Renshaw, Esq. Nottingham.

  Mr. Robert Robinson, Havering, Essex.

  Mr. John Rowell, Holbeck, Lancashire.

  The Honourable John Simpson, M.P. Babworth, Nottinghamshire.

  S. E. Sawbridge, Esq. Olantigh, Kent.

  Robert Snow, Esq. Temple Bar, London.

  John Shaw, Esq. Wheston Hall, Derbyshire.

  William Sandby, Esq. Rochlin, Herefordshire.

  John Stephens, Esq. Reading.

  Thomas Sewell, Esq. Newport, Isle of Wight.

  William Stone, Esq. Englefield, Berkshire.

  Benjamin Severn, Esq. Hare Hall, Essex.

  Mr. John Sutton, Sawtry, Huntingdonshire.

  Mr. William Speechly, King’s Newton Hall, Derbyshire.

  Mr. Robert Swift, Wyddial, Hertfordshire.

  The Right Hon. Lord John Townshend, Balls Park, Hertfordshire.

  The Rev. Robert Thomson, LL.D. Long Stowe Hall, Cambridgeshire.

  H. B. Thornhill, Esq. Langwith Lodge, Notts.

  C. T. Tower, Esq. Weald Hall, Essex.

  George Tuson, Esq. Ilchester, Somersetshire.

  Mr. William Trumper, Dorney, Buckinghamshire.

  Mr. Reynier Tiler, Windsor, Berkshire.

  Mr. Robert Tomlin, Stoke, Derbyshire.

  Mr. John Trumper, Harefield, Middlesex.

  C. C. Western, Esq. M.P. Felix Hall, Essex.

  The Rev. E. Williamson, Campton, Bedfordshire.

  C. H. Ware, Esq. Gray’s Inn, Middlesex.

  John Willock, Esq. Golden Square, London.

  Thomas Willan, Esq. Marybone Park, Middlesex.

  Mr. Charles Waistell, Holborn, Middlesex.

  Mr. William Weller, Amersham, Buckinghamshire.

  Mr. William Ward, Durham.

  Mr. Thomas Wolton, Pirgo Park, Essex.

  Mr. Joseph Watson, Shimpling, Norfolk.

  Mr. William Weedon, Wilsden Green, Middlesex.




                                 ON THE

                          IMPROVED BEET ROOT,

                                   AS

                        WINTER FOOD FOR CATTLE.




                                CHAP. I.


The garden at Cheese Cross produced a fine crop of the Improved Beet
Root. The roots, when about the size of a radish, were thinned out with
a turnip hoe, leaving the plants nearly 15 inches apart each way. I
selected 60 square yards, 6 by 10, and found the produce to be 360
roots, equal to 29,040 roots upon an acre. They weighed from 1 pound to
12 pounds each, and 10 of them, taken up indiscriminately, weighed 40
pounds. Supposing them, therefore, to average 4 pounds each, the
_weight_ upon an acre would be something more than 50 tons. One hundred
weight, cut into small pieces for the cattle, measured 2 bushels. The
_quantity_ per acre may therefore be estimated at 2000 bushels, 2
bushels are given to each bullock daily: 196 bushels, the produce of
only about a tenth part of an acre of garden ground, planted in this
way, would keep a bullock 14 weeks.

In Mason’s field, on the road from Bedfords to Havering, another fine
crop was obtained. The roots, when about the size of a radish, were
taken out of the seed bed, and planted in rows, 3 feet asunder, and the
plants were about 18 inches apart in each row. I selected 60 square
yards, 6 by 10, and found the produce to be 126 roots, equal to 10,164
roots upon an acre. These roots weighed, on an average, 5 pounds each,
so that the weight upon an acre would be something more than 22 tons.
Each bullock eats 1 cwt. per day. The produce of 1 acre of ground,
planted in this way, would keep 4 bullocks feeding for 110 days.

In another part of the same field, on the road from Bedfords to
Havering, the seed was dibbled in rows, 2 feet apart, and the plants
were left 12 inches apart in each row. I selected 60 square yards, 6 by
10, and found the produce to be 270 roots; equal to 21,780 roots upon an
acre. These roots average a little more than 5 pounds each. The weight
upon an acre would therefore be something more than 48 tons. Each
bullock eats 1 cwt. per day. The produce of 1 acre of land, planted in
this way, would keep 10 bullocks feeding for 97 days.




                               CHAP. II.


This is the third year that Mr. Heaton has cultivated the improved Beet
Root with great success, in three different ways; namely, broadcast on
ground under garden culture; and, in the field, by dibbling in the seed,
and transplanting the roots. The result fully justifies a preference in
favour of dibbling in rows 2 feet apart, as will be seen by the
following short statement of the produce obtained under each mode of
culture.

                                                             │ PRODUCE.
 Broadcast, on strong land, spade-trenched, 10 inches deep,  │ 50 tons
 leaving the plants after hoeing nearly 15 inches apart each │per acre.
 way,                                                        │

 Transplanted in rows 3 feet apart, and the plants about 18  │ 22 tons
 inches apart in each row,                                   │per acre.

 Dibbling the seed in rows 2 feet apart, and the plants left │ 48 tons
 12 inches apart in each row,                                │per acre.

A good crop may be obtained by the broadcast method upon deep, loose
soils, or upon strong soils spade-trenched, 10 or 12 inches deep; but by
that mode much seed is wasted, and much extra expence incurred in
labour, hoeing, and transplanting, before the plants are placed 5 inches
apart each way, which is very material to insure a good crop, under that
mode of culture.




                               CHAP. III


To those who may have been in the habit of cultivating the Swedish
turnip, it may be desirable to point out the advantages which the
improved Beet Root has over that turnip. Mr. Heaton had last year, in
his Havering Green field, the best crop of Swedish turnips that I have
ever seen, upon his farm, during twelve years’ attention to the
management of it; and his intelligent agent and farmer, Mr. Henry
Gibbons, assures me, that he did not see a better crop between London
and Derby, from which latter place he returned in December last.

The Swedes in this field were drilled in rows 24 inches apart, and the
plants were left about 9 inches apart in each row. I selected 60 square
yards, 6 by 10, and found the produce to be 252 turnips, equal to 20,356
upon an acre. I weighed many of them, and found them from half a pound
to 6 pounds each, averaging 2 pounds. The weight upon an acre would,
therefore, be something more than 18 tons: _less_ by 30 tons than the
produce of an acre of the improved Beet, dibbled in rows 2 feet apart,
and the plants left 12 inches apart in each row.

The improved Beet has other material advantages over turnips. The crop
is more certain, as the infant root is not injured by the fly; the
ground may be cleared in time to sow wheat upon it, and the Beet
attaining perfection, as it does, before the winter sets in, much labour
and all the difficulty of getting and carting turnips in bad weather are
saved to the farmer.

A bushel of the sliced Beet weighs 6 pounds heavier than a bushel of
Swede turnip sliced. Two bushels of it per day satisfies a bullock
better than 2 bushels and a half of Swedes; and it is well known, that 2
bushels and a half of Swedes are better than 3 bushels of common
turnips. Sheep are fond of the improved Beet after Christmas; so are
pigs, young cattle, and cows; and, with hay or straw, it will be found
excellent food for young horses. For milch cows, the Beets have a
decided advantage over turnips. Turnips, from their rankness, spoil the
cream and butter; Beet, from its peculiar sweetness, improves both.

It is strongly recommended to the farmers near London to cultivate this
root, and to the cowkeepers in London to consume it: to them it will be
found of great value.

Since the above was written, the Author has been favoured with the
following information, from a Friend, who left his crop in the ground
till spring.

“My Beet in the Old Yard has stood the late severe frost better than any
common turnips, and perhaps equally well with the Swedes, very few
indeed being injured. Some of them were covered with snow, but others
were exposed. They were rather small, having been planted so late as
June.” I. K.


  “Feb. 23, 1814.”




                               CHAP. IV.


For the information and guidance of those occupiers of land, who may be
desirous of cultivating the improved Beet Root upon strong land, the
next Chapter will contain a particular account of the method used in
cultivating that root upon strong land at Bedfords. The method there
stated, is that which has been found, on three years’ trial, to be least
expensive in the beginning, and most profitable in the end.—The
cultivation of this root is earnestly recommended to the attention of
all persons farming strong lands with a view to profit. It should never
be forgotten, that 48 tons, the produce of only a single acre, of this
root, will make 10 bullocks fat enough for the butcher; and that 6
acres, of equal produce, will fatten 60 bullocks; that the profit on
each bullock will be considerable; and that when the business of feeding
is over, the yard will be full of rich dung: neither should it be
forgotten, that the tenant who sells his straw, cannot partake of any of
these advantages.

In proof of this assertion, the following facts are submitted for
consideration:

Mr. Heaton bought two lean Welch bullocks, at Harlow Bush Fair, on the
9th of September. They cost together £34. They were pastured on the
Rowens till the 20th of November following, when they were tied up, and
fed with Beet Root and oat straw till the 9th of February following,
when they were sold together, in Romford market, for the sum of £50;
yielding in twenty-two weeks, a profit of £16, which is equal to 7s. 3d.
per week, for each bullock.

These two bullocks were tied up twelve weeks each, in which time they
ate eight tons 2 cwt. of Beet Root, the produce of only one-sixth part
of an acre of land, cultivated according to the method recommended in
the following chapter.




                                CHAP. V.
THE METHOD USED IN THE CULTIVATION OF THE IMPROVED BEET ROOT UPON STRONG
                           LAND AT BEDFORDS.


It may be proper, in the first place, to state what is meant by strong
land. The surface soil is loamy, and from 4 to 12 inches deep, upon a
bed of strong clay mixed with gravel. It is too heavy, and generally too
wet, in the winter, even for sheep to eat a crop of turnips on the
ground; and although good turnips are grown upon it, it is always
necessary to draw them for the sheep, stall-fed cattle, or for cattle in
the yards. The ground is prepared to receive the seed, and cleaned in
the same way as it would have been for Swedish turnips. As that part of
the business is so well known to all farmers, it is not necessary to
enter into detail upon it.

In the middle, or latter end of the month of April, the furrows are set
out with the plough, 2 feet apart, and double ploughed; that is, the
plough returns on the furrow to the point whence it set out, forming a
ridge between each furrow.

Double ploughing with a common plough is preferred to single ploughing
with a double mould board plough, because it affords a greater depth of
loose earth than the double mould board plough would produce.

In these furrows, the manure, which should be in a rotten state, is
deposited, after the rate of six cubic yards to an acre.

The ridges are then split by the plough going and returning the same way
as before mentioned, leaving the manure immediately under the middle of
the new ridges, A light roller is then passed along the ridges, in the
middle of which the seed is dibbled, so that the plants may receive all
the benefit which can be derived from the manure.

The seed is deposited about an inch deep whilst the moisture is fresh in
the earth, and covered by drawing a garden rake along the rows.

After this, the light roller is again passed along the ridges, and the
work is finished.

When the plants are about the size of a radish, they are hoed with a
turnip hoe, leaving the plants in the rows about 12 inches apart. If any
of the seeds fail, and there happen not to be an even crop, the roots,
where they are too thick, are drawn out before the hoeing takes place,
and transplanted, to fill up the vacant places, and insure a full crop,
which is always certain, inasmuch as 99 plants out of 100, thrive and do
well. In transplanting, care is necessary to prevent the point of the
root from turning upwards.

The weeds, whilst the plants are young, are kept hoed, but after the
head of the plant has once spread, no weed can live underneath its
shade, and the expence of hoeing afterwards is very trifling indeed.

The whole of the crop is taken up in the month of November, in dry
weather. The tops are cut off _near_ the _crown_ of the plants, and the
plants, when perfectly dry, are piled up in a shed, and covered with
straw sufficiently thick to preserve them from the frost. They kept last
year till the latter end of March, and they would have kept much longer.

The seed may be had of Cochran, seedsman, in Duke Street, Grosvenor
Square; of Messrs. Gibbs and Co. Half Moon Street, Piccadilly; and of
Mr. Mason, Fleet Street. From 3 to 4 pounds of the seed will be
sufficient for an acre of ground, prepared and dibbled according to the
method here stated. The price last year was 7s. per pound, but it may
probably be less hereafter, as the growers of the root, so long as that
high price continues, will of course save their own seed, and thereby
lessen the demand from the seedsman.


                THE METHOD BEFORE DESCRIBED ELUCIDATED.


                  Form of the ridges before manuring.

                          a     a     a     a
                         /    /    /    /                         /    /    /    /                          /    /    /    /                                  b     b     b

The tops of the ridges about 2 inches broad, _a._ _a._ _a._

Intervals of 24 inches from one _a_ to another.

Depths about 12 inches from _a_ to _b_.

Furrows where the manure is deposited, _b._ _b._ _b._


            Form of the ridges after splitting and rolling.

                          A      A      A      A
                         ---    ---    ---    ---
                        /     /     /     /                           /     /     /     /                                ^      ^      ^      ^
                          B      B      B      B


    Tops A. A. A. 9 inches broad, in the middle of which the seed is
                               deposited.

Situation of the manure B. B. B.




                               CHAP. VI.


It will not be supposed, by any intelligent farmer, that where the
quantity of the Improved Beet Root given daily to a bullock is stated,
it is meant that it should be given without dry food. It may, however,
be necessary to say, that the same dry food must be given with the Beet
as is usually given with turnips. Mr. Heaton last year gave oat straw
only, and the bullocks did well upon that food, and were sold to profit.
No doubt they would have been ready for the butcher sooner, had good hay
been given to them: but this fact may be relied upon, that fresh
bullocks, fed upon the Beet Root and oat straw, will, in 3 months time,
get fat enough for the butcher.

It may also be necessary to observe, that not a word, here stated, is
intended to apply to such light turnip soils as will bear the trampling
of sheep, without injury to the land. Mr. Heaton has none such upon his
farm, and I have not sufficient knowledge of the management of turnip
land, of that description, to say, whether prudence would warrant any
trial of the Beet Root upon a large scale, on such soil, to be eaten on
the land.

Where a field, selected for a crop of Beet, happens to be in a foul
state, the seed had better be sown in a garden, and the whole field
planted with the young Beet, when of the size of a radish. This will
give time for cleaning the ground, and fitting it for a crop; for,
although the Beets are destroyers of weeds, it is not meant to recommend
the sowing them on foul ground, or in any way to encourage a slovenly
system of farming.

Although manure has been used in the cultivation of this root, it is not
absolutely necessary; and, if not in a rotten state, it does mischief.
Good crops have been obtained at Bedfords _without manure_, and without
injury to the succeeding crops of corn. Beet is fed from a depth
considerably below the reach of the plough, as generally used; so that
it does not draw the surface soil in which corn is fed.

The method of cultivating the Beet Root here recommended, is the same as
that which is used in the cultivation of turnips, in Northumberland and
other parts of the north, with this exception, that the rows there are
27 inches apart. There may be reasons in the north for still preferring
that space, but in Essex the effect of it, in the cultivation of Beet
Root, would be, that, instead of 48 tons per acre, 43 tons only would be
obtained. Experience has proved, that the roots do not get to a larger
size in rows 3 feet apart, than they do in rows 2 feet apart. It may,
therefore, fairly be presumed, that they would not be larger in rows 27
inches apart; and if not larger, the weight of the crop, per acre, must
be less, because the plants decrease in number as the rows increase in
space.

The advantages that would arise from the cultivation of these roots,
upon a small part of every strong-land-farm throughout the kingdom, must
be obvious. Calculations might be given that would astonish and almost
exceed the belief of most readers. Such calculations, however, in
general, are but little attended to, and it is thought better to omit
them, hoping that enough has been said upon the subject, to fix the
attention of every person interested in the cultivation of land.

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




                               APPENDIX.


[Illustration: [Fleuron]]


                                           _Workington Hall, Cumberland,
                                                       March 9, 1814._

  SIR,

          I had the pleasure of receiving your obliging favour last
  night, with two copies of the publication on Mangel Wurzel. I have
  cultivated that root for some years with success. From the Bishop of
  Derry I learnt to apply the leaves to soiling my milch cows and pigs.
  The leaves of a good crop are from 10 to 15 tons per acre. I have
  steeped the seed and mixed it with sand previous to sowing, by which
  means it vegetates immediately. I have had 60 tons per acre on 3 feet
  stiches, 9 inches between the plants, and have kept the roots good
  till the middle of May. I have given the seed to many of my cottagers,
  who have grown the roots for their pigs, and they have found them to
  answer well.

                                                       I am, &c.
                                                           J. C. CURWEN.

                                             _Barrowby, Lincolnshire,
                                                     December 15, 1814._

  SIR,

          For the last four winters I have constantly fed my milch cows
  with Beet, but I never exceeded, I believe, a bushel per day to each;
  not from any apprehension of ill effects when given in larger
  quantities. My object was, to make it last the longer, as the milk and
  cream were evidently much improved thereby. The cows always had plenty
  of hay with the Beet, and when the weather, or rather the state of the
  land would admit, they were turned into a grass field adjoining my
  farm yard.

  Mr. Turney, of Sedgbrook, who has finished off some bullocks this
  Autumn, whilst at grass, with Beet, has given it with great good
  effect to his milch cows for the last two winters, and he is at this
  time keeping a new-calved heifer upon it.

  I may add, that I have always found the milk to be increased in
  quantity, as well as improved in quality, whilst the Beet was used.

  As to the weight of my crop, this year, it is much less than usual. My
  land, you know, is old garden ground, and produced a crop of Beet last
  year, Swedes the year before, and carrots in 1811. A tenacious loam,
  on clay, difficult to work in the Spring. On this I got only 7 cwt. 2
  qrs. on 6 yards by 10, which is after the rate of 30 tons per acre.

                                                    I am, &c.
                                                        JONATHAN KENDAL.

                                                 _Stag Brewhouse,
                                                     December 18, 1814._

  SIR,

          Herewith you receive my report of a small piece of land,
  planted with Mangel Wurzel by Colonel Elliott. I have been as correct
  as possible, and have to observe, that I think the culture of it well
  worth the attention of every farmer.

  The latter end of April, 1814, ten poles of land were sown with Mangel
  Wurzel, 20 inches distance, in drills; the plants in the row thinned
  to about 15 inches. The land poor, consisting principally of brick
  rubbish and road scrapings, with a slight coat of _rotten dung_
  previous to the sowing. It had two hoeings after the plants were
  thinned. The plants in two of the rows, about the centre of the piece,
  were set out 2 feet apart, but these were not larger than where they
  were at 15 inches.

  On the 8th of November the whole crop was taken up, and, after cutting
  off the heads, were packed up in a loft. To prevent any incorrectness
  in calculating the weight by the number of the roots, the whole crop
  was weighed, which amounted to 3 tons, 1 cwt. 56 pounds, which is
  according to the rate of 49 tons 4 cwt. per acre. A large portion of
  the roots weighed from 7 lbs. to 12 lbs. each. When the rows were
  first thinned, some other pieces were planted with the spare plants,
  but these did not succeed so well: they were much less than the
  others.

  Hogs are remarkably fond of this root, and thrive very fast with it:
  cows are also very eager after both leaves and root. Colonel Elliott
  began feeding his cows with the Mangel Wurzel in July; the weather
  being very dry, we were very short of grass. We began with the leaves,
  and soon after with the roots of two pieces, which were transplanted.
  The cows looked well and increased in their milk, and were partially
  fed with the roots till the crop was taken up. The roots were then
  sliced, and as much of them given to the cows (with a little hay) as
  they could eat; the milk increased immediately, and the cows improved
  in flesh.

  My opinion is, that the Mangel Wurzel is a most valuable article of
  food to the farmer; because, in a severe winter, when turnips are in
  general destroyed, these roots, properly stacked in a dry place, and
  covered so as to prevent severe frosts from injuring them, will be a
  certain supply of nutricious and fattening food, (if cultivated in
  sufficient quantity) until the spring grass is fit to turn in upon. I
  should conceive, if the seed is put into the ground in the month of
  May, after the manner practised in drilling turnips on ridges, that no
  doubt can be entertained of obtaining a full crop. As Mangel Wurzel
  exceeds all other winter food, from being preserved under cover
  without injuring the quality, so it will prevent a recurrence to the
  expensive food of oil cake or corn.

                                                    I am, &c.
                                                            G. T. BOULT.

                                                         _Kentish Town,
                                                     December 29, 1814._

  SIR,

          Having presented one of your books to Mr. Richard Laycock, a
  considerable farmer and cowkeeper at Holloway, with a request that he
  would cultivate the root, he did me the favour to make choice of a
  piece of land, containing 1 rood and 20 perches, which had been part
  of a field, composed of brick earth or strong clay, in the procurement
  of which, the field had for several years past been dug over to a
  great depth below the original surface. On this piece he caused a
  quantity of soil and rotten dung intermixed therewith to be laid, and
  the ground levelled, about 10 or 12 inches deep. In the month of May
  he commenced dibbling the seed in rows 2 feet asunder, and 1 foot
  apart in the rows; but, for want of time, only about one third part of
  the crop was got in by this mode. The remainder was transplanted in
  the middle of June. The whole of the land was kept perfectly clean,
  and, while confined to the upper soil, the plants made rapid progress.
  Had the subsoil been of a yielding nature, the crop would have been
  extraordinary; but it was observable, although the tap roots were
  particularly vigorous, that so soon as they had penetrated to the
  unbroken clay, they invariably divided and turned off in a horizontal
  direction, and afterwards threw out fibrous shoots without number. The
  seed was procured from a nurseryman at Fulham, and was particularly
  good. Very few of the plants ran up to seed; those that did so, were
  not suffered to remain, but were taken up and given to the cows, as
  were also the lower leaves, which were repeatedly stripped off in
  considerable quantities. In the middle of November the whole crop was
  drawn off and weighed, after being cleared of the tops and loose dirt.
  The produce was 15 tons and a few pounds over, average weight of the
  roots, 5¾ pounds. Correspondent produce 40 tons per acre.

  Although this experiment on Mr. Laycock’s land falls short of those
  stated in your Treatise, yet, when the extreme unfavourableness of its
  situation is considered, that of an exhausted brickfield, the
  deficiency is easily accounted for. Indeed I cannot help thinking its
  result such, as to hold out considerable temptation to occupiers of
  strong clay farms, whereon turnips cannot successfully be cultivated,
  to make trial of a root, which, with previous winter plowing, promises
  more profit than can be obtained from any other crop that I know
  of[1]. The increase of live stock and radical improvements of such
  farms must necessarily follow.

                                                   I am, &c.
                                                           PETER POTTER.


Footnote 1:

  This description of soil in some seasons is too wet to warrant the
  removal of a crop of Mangel Wurzel in November. When grown on such
  soils to be used early in the winter, the crop may be taken up in
  October; if intended for use in the cold spring months it may remain,
  with perfect safety, till the ground is sufficiently dry to prevent
  harm being done by the wheels of carts and the trampling of
  horses.—EDITOR.


                                             _Lincroft House, Lichfield.
                                                     December 13, 1814._

  SIR,

          I have for your information weighed and taken a pretty
  accurate account of my small crop of Mangel Wurzel, which I have
  lately gathered out of a garden belonging to my farm. The length of
  the garden is 62 yards; and the breadth of the part sown 12 yards, and
  the produce, according to my firm belief and best calculation, is 4
  tons, 6 cwt. 40 pounds, and I am well convinced in my own mind, that
  had I properly attended to the culture of this root, I might have
  obtained a much greater produce, even in that space of ground; for,
  you will observe, I have not strictly adhered to the plan laid down in
  your little publication. In the first instance, the ground was very
  foul at the time of sowing, and the plants, when growing, were about
  18 inches apart one way, and nearly one yard the other; there being
  only 13 rows in the space of 12 yards, and the garden too surrounded
  with trees, so that I consider every thing was unfavourable. I further
  beg leave to state as my opinion, that as the ground is very strong,
  it is not well adapted to the growth of Beet, and as most of the roots
  were transplanted, they had not a fair chance.

  Transplanted roots are seldom so good as those which have not been
  removed. I have given Beet Root, for two years past, both to feeding
  and milch cows with good effect.

                                                         I am &c.
                                                             J. PADMORE.

                                                 _Wheston, Tideswell,
                                                     December 16, 1814._

  SIR,

          My Beet Root this year was sown upon light dry limestone land,
  of good quality, perfectly clean, but in a high situation and cold
  climate. The seed was partly sown in beds a yard and a half in width,
  partly drilled, and partly dibbled in ridges at the distance of 28
  inches, and the plants left 12 inches apart after hoeing. The rows
  drilled came up much the best, and continued altogether the finest
  plants. They were thinned and hoed early. The dibbled seed missed in a
  great number of places[2]; the vacancies were supplied from the
  drilled rows, transplanted at different ages, and at different times
  of the year, (as the season suited for the purpose,) but none of them
  grew in size or luxuriance[2] equal to those left standing in the
  drilled rows. In the beds the plants were extremely numerous, but they
  had not the same advantages of being thinned and hoed so early as the
  drilled rows, and they were in general small in size.

Footnote 2:

    Probably planted too deep.—EDITOR.

  I had a most productive supply of green food to the fold yard, during
  the months of September and October, from the tops, and during the
  latter month many of the plants which had run to seed, were also taken
  up and consumed in the same way. They were given to milch cows morning
  and evening, during milking time, and to store pigs in the fold yard.

  The produce on 6 yards by 10 was 206 roots in number, and 477 pounds
  in weight, to which may be added about one-tenth more for plants
  consumed before the crop was taken up.

  I think the Beet Root affords a very material increase to the stock of
  green food, of the best quality in the Autumn. months, and, when grown
  near enough to the farm yard to be taken daily as wanted, without too
  great an expence in labour and carriage, that mode of consuming the
  leaves and some of the roots may be resorted to with great advantage,
  and it may be found a resource of no small use in dry seasons.

  Cattle in general eat both the root and top with eagerness. Pigs
  prefer them to any other vegetable food. I have occasionally given the
  roots in winter to horses, and particularly to brood mares and to
  foals, with hay, and they have invariably done well.

                                                          I am, &c.
                                                              JOHN SHAW.


These and many other letters have been received by the author from
gentlemen residing in different parts of the kingdom, recommending, from
their own experience and success, the culture of the improved Beet Root,
to those farmers who have yet to learn its value. In so doing, they are
not actuated by any sordid motive or selfish principle. To do good to
others is their aim, and to promote the public welfare the utmost of
their ambition.


                                 FINIS.




             _J. Swan, Printer, 76, Fleet Street, London._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typographical errors fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.



